# MeanShift

C++ implementation of the
[mean shift](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mean_shift) clustering algorithm
with OpenMP.

In this README you will find instructions about how to compile the program and
how to execute it. In the directory `Paper` there is a technical paper about
the algorithm and the comparison of the sequential version with the parallel
version.

## Compiling

If you are used to CLion, you could open the directory `MeanShift` with the
IDE. You will find all the necessary build configurations.

Otherwise, go to the `MeanShift` directory, create a build folder and change
directory to that folder:


    cd Meanshift
    mkdir build
    cd build

Then you can compile the program in two versions:

* A sequential version:

```
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ../
make meanshift
```

* A parallel version, with OpenMP:

```
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS=-fopenmp ../
make meanshift
```

The parallel version will be much faster, because it uses the OpenMP
directives to perform multithreading operations.

## Usage

The result of the compilation is an executable called `meanshift`. It takes
as input a CSV file containing the points to cluster and the bandwidth
parameter of the mean shift algorithm. The points in the CSV file must be all
of the same dimension (each row of the CSV file must contains the **same
number of columns**) and there must be **only numerical values**. To get the
clustering result, you must append to the command the string `--write-output
<filename>`: the program will generate a file `<filename>.csv` containing the
points where the last number of each row is the cluster to which the point
belongs.

In the directory `ClusteringTests/datasets` there are some datasets to
perform some tests.

I **strongly reccomend** you to use the python script `plot_clusters.py`
located in the directory `ClusteringTests` to execute the program and plot
the results. It requires Python >= 3.5, numpy and matplotlib.
`plot_clusters.py` take as input the CSV file and the bandwidth parameter.
Pay attention where the `meanshift` executable is located, you could set the
right path in the script `plot_clusters.py`.

## Example

The dataset `data8.csv` contains 10000 points distributed in three gaussian
blobs with standard deviation 1.

If we execute the mean shift algorithm with bandwidth 1 we get exactly the
three clusters:

    $ python plot_clusters.py datasets/data8.csv 1
    File: datasets/data8.csv
    Number of points: 10000
    Number of dimensions: 3
    Number of clusters: 3
    Elapsed time: 6.66942 s

![3clusters](ReadmeImg/3clusters.png)

If we increase the bandwidth value to 10, then all the points will go in the
same cluster:


    $ python plot_clusters.py datasets/data8.csv 10
    File: datasets/data8.csv
    Number of points: 10000
    Number of dimensions: 3
    Number of clusters: 1
    Elapsed time: 22.963 s

![1cluster](ReadmeImg/1cluster.png)


## Speedup

The file `speeduptest` in the directory`ClusteringTests` is a BASH script
that executes the sequential version and then executes different parallel
versions with a different number of threads to estimate the speedup obtained
by parallelizing the algorithm.

The results and the analysis of the speedup is described in the technical
paper in the directory `Paper`.
